
01
02
03
04
06
07
14
03
11
13
17
20
23
24
27
29
31
33
36
38
Table of Contents
05
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
15
2
40
09
05
16
17
Ÿ Road Connectivity
Ÿ Energy
Ÿ Jal Shakti
Ÿ Immunization and Nutrition
Ÿ Eliminating Tuberculosis
Ÿ Making Healthcare Accessible
Ÿ Implementing Cooperative Federalism
E??ectively
Ÿ Railways
Ÿ Corruption-free Bharat
Ÿ Simultaneous Elections
Ÿ Ensuring Urban Development
Ÿ Establishment of New Airpo??s
Ÿ Police reforms
Ÿ Digital Connectivity
Ÿ Coastal Development
Healthy India - Determined India
Ÿ Strengthening Health Infrastructure
Good Governance
Ÿ Swachh Bharat Mission
Ÿ Civil Service and Governance Reforms
Ÿ Judicial Reforms
Ÿ Implementing Citizenship Amendment Bill
Ÿ Welfare policies for Farmers
Ÿ Animal Husbandry
Ÿ Low tax and Investment driven Growth
Ÿ MSMEs
Ÿ Jammu & Kashmir - A??icle 370
Towards a New India
Ÿ Coastal safety
Shri Amit Shah
Ÿ Welfare of soldiers
Ÿ Development of Argi-allied sectors
Ÿ Convergence of Agriculture and
Technology
Ÿ Roadmap for 5 trillion dollar economy
Ÿ Cooperatives
Ÿ Blue Revolution
Le??er to 130 Crore Indians from
Message from Shri Rajnath Singh
Ÿ Goods and Service Tax
Ÿ Zero-tolerance approach to terrorism
Ÿ National Security
Ÿ Combating In??ltration
Message from BJP National President,
Ÿ Rs.100 lakh crore Investment
Ÿ Make In India
Ÿ On the Path of Gram Swaraj
PM Shri Narendra Modi
Nation First
Ÿ Combating Le?? Wing Extremism
Doubling Farmers Income
Ÿ Expanding Irrigation in Mission Mode
India as the World’s 3rd Largest Economy
Ÿ Increase contribution of the mining sector
to 2.5% of GDP
Ÿ Entrepreneurship & Sta??Ups
Ÿ Using Tourism to Cluster Services
Ÿ Transparent economy
Infrastructure - Foundation of New India
Ÿ International Trade
Ÿ Dharohar Darshan
Ÿ Conserving Bharatiya Faith and Culture
Ÿ Permanent membership of the United Nations
Security Council
Ÿ Namami Gange: A ma??er of Pride
Foreign Policy
Ÿ Continuous Dialogue with Indians Living
Abroad
Ÿ Deeper Multilateral Cooperation
Ÿ Strengthening the Diplomatic Cadre and
Outreach
Ÿ Bharatiya Cultural Festival
Ÿ Global Coordination on Knowledge and
Technology
Ÿ ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’
75 Milestones for India @ 75
Ÿ Sabarimala
Ÿ Conserving Bharatiya Linguistic Culture
Ÿ Combating Terrorism through Global Forums
Ÿ Ram Mandir
Ÿ Promoting Yoga Globally
Ÿ Protecting the Himalayas
Ÿ Creating Oppo??unities for Youth
Ÿ Primary and Secondary Education
Ÿ Science and Technology
Ÿ Focussing on Union Territories
Yuva Bharat - Tomorrow's India
Ÿ Youth in Governance
Education for All
Ÿ Skill Development
Ÿ Ease of Living
Ÿ Focussing on Island Territories
Ÿ Forest and Environment
Ÿ Development of No??heastern States
Ÿ Spo??s
Ÿ Higher Education
Ÿ Women-Led Development
Ÿ Ensuring Equal Rights
Ÿ Ensuring a Digni??ed Life for Women
Ÿ Reservation for Women
Inclusive Development
Ÿ Ensuring Justice for All
Ÿ Ensuring welfare of Poor
Ÿ Responsive to the needs of Aspirational
Middle Class
Ÿ Strengthening ‘Sabka Vikas’
Ÿ Development with Dignity for the Minorities
Ÿ Caring for the Elderly
Women Empowerment
Ÿ Enabling Divyangs
Ÿ Commitment to Geographical Equity
Ÿ Political resolution on the ma??er of Gorkha
Ÿ Ensuring welfare of the labour force
Ÿ Pension Scheme for all Small Shopkeepers
Ÿ Ensuring Welfare of A??isans
Ÿ Empowering Transgenders
Cultural Heritage
Ÿ Protecting our Children
At that time, India's challenges were monumental- our economy was in the doldrums, the nation was
among the fragile ??ve, pessimism and despair was all-pervasive and corruption was rampant. There were
serious doubts in the minds of many about India's ability to ful??ll the dreams and aspirations of her citizens.
Five years ago, on 26th May 2014, we commenced our journey to transform our great nation and do justice
to the historic mandate bestowed upon us.
The BJP comes to you to seek your valued blessings yet again, so that India continues unhindered on the
path of development, to realize its true destiny with renewed vigour.
At an unimaginable speed and scale, what seemed impossible earlier soon became a reality. In the last ??ve
??ve years, every Indian family got a bank account due to Jan Dhan Yojana, 50 crore Indians got health
insurance thanks to Ayushman Bharat and more than 40 crore people in the unorganised sector can now
avail pension coverage. A subject like cleanliness ignited the imagination of the nation and now we are close
to 99% sanitation coverage, compared to a mere 38% in 2014. It is now possible for youngsters from smaller
towns to become entrepreneurs thanks to Mudra Yojana. The rising neo-middle and middle class with
taxable income upto Rs. 5 lakhs no longer need to pay income tax.
India's No??heast, which earlier made headlines for blockage and neglect, is now witnessing
unprecedented development. The No??heast is now closer to the national mainstream in more ways than
one.
Dear sisters and brothers,
Our Government ??lled the infrastructure gaps with speed and foresight. The pace of construction of roads
and railway lines has doubled. India has now more e??cient po??s. 18,000 villages living in darkness till 2014
are now brightly lit thanks to rural electri??cation e??o??s. More than 2.6 crore homes have been electri??ed
through Saubhagya Yojana. Over 1.5 crore homes built over the last ??ve years have enabled millions to
dream big.
The nation is no longer helpless against the barbaric forces of terror. Any destructive ideology that destroys
the atmosphere of peace and unity is and will be given a be????ing reply. They are being paid back in their own
coin, with compound interest.
But, if challenges were enormous, so was our resolve to build a stronger, safer and prosperous nation.
Powered and inspired by the strengths and skills of 130 crore Indians, we conve??ed obstacles into
oppo??unities, decay into development and pessimism into positivity.
A New India of
130 CRORE
DREAMS
8th April, 2019
3
The Central Government has waged a determined crusade against the scourge of corruption and black
money. The culture of middlemen roaming in the corridors of power is now history. Decisions are guided by
public interest of all Indians and not the self-interest of a select few. The trinity of Jan Dhan- Aadhaar and
Mobile has weeded out over 8 crore fake bene??ciaries, and prevented leakages of more than Rs. 1 lakh
crore. Systems have been strengthened to prevent money laundering. The corrupt have begun to realize
that their machinations will no longer be tolerated.
One can clearly see how development has become a mass movement. Numerous people friendly decisions
have led to the empowerment of 130 crore Indians and the safeguarding of our strategic interests.
Today, India stands tall at the international level. The world recognizes India's immense potential, which is
clearly re??ected in a record rise in foreign investment. India's stand on subjects like terrorism, climate
change and prevention of money laundering are se??ing the global narrative.
Friends,
Through this Sankalp Patra, you would get a glimpse of the challenges of the yesteryears, the indomitable
e??o??s made by 130 crore Indians to overcome those challenges and our collective vision for the future.
We have achieved a lot in the last ??ve years and we want to do lot more. There are two commitments that I
am extremely passionate about- doubling of farmer income and housing for all, by the year 2022. With your
suppo??, I am sure both will happen.
Together, let us work towards building a strong and inclusive India, whose citizens are assured of dignity,
prosperity, security and oppo??unity.
Narendra Modi
The next ??ve years are crucial because in 2022, we mark the 75th anniversary of our Independence.
Generations of great women and men laid down their lives so that we could breathe the air of freedom. It is
our sacred duty to create the India of their dreams.
In 2047, our nation would complete a hundred years of freedom. Let us together imagine what is the kind of
India that we want by 2047. The BJP pledges to make the next ??ve years as the foundation laying period for
India of 2047. Let us together lay the foundations of this vision now, and work earnestly towards translating
this vision into a golden reality.
Your vote in 2014 for a strong and decisive government enabled us to ??ll some of the biggest sho??comings
of ??ve decades of dynastic rule in a sho?? span of just ??ve years. Now that these sho??comings have been
successfully addressed, imagine the pace at which we can work in the times to come.
Having seen the work of di??erent political pa??ies and ideologies, the people of India are convinced that if
there is one pa??y that can address their problems, it is the BJP. The Mantra of 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas' has
resonated across the length and breadth of India. BJP is a pa??y for every Indian. It is a Pa??y that works 24/7
at the grassroots level. That is why, the suppo?? we have received has been historic and unprecedented
Vande Mataram!
I thank lakhs of ale??, commi??ed and patriotic citizens of India, who have enriched the Sankalp Patra with
their valuable inputs. This Sankalp Patra is the voice of the people in the truest sense.
New India has broken from the shackles of the past. Today, we are a nation that is daring to dream and
dreaming to dare. There is an air of hope and a spirit of aspiration among the youth.
4
Today, when we are ushering in the biggest festival of democracy - the General Elections of 2019, I would
like to dwell on the resolves made by the BJP. In 2014, when the BJP presented its Vision Document before
the people, India’s march of development had already been derailed because of the UPA government’s
inaction and policy paralysis. It was a phase when the hope of seeing a corruption free and transparent
government realised seemed impossible. Nobody was ready to believe that multi-dimensional
developmental goals could be achieved without reso??ing to corruption. However, the government led by
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi turned this belief into a reality by successfully running the government in
a transparent manner. We have succeeded in conveying this message to the people at large that
governance is possible without corruption.
It has been seen in the past that even if a government continues to govern the country for a period of twenty
years, it succeeds in taking one or two historic decisions. In its tenure of ??ve years, the government led by
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has been able to take many decisions which are historic and has ushered
in a comprehensive and fundamental transformation. Swachh Bharat Mission, Ujjawala Yojana, Saubhagya
Yojana, Demonetisation, GST, Surgical Strikes, Air Strikes, total electri??cation, provision for housing for 2.5
crore families, health insurance under Ayushman Bharat for more than 50 crore people and disbursement
In 2014, Shri Narendra Modi emerged as the symbol of the aspirations of the people of India and we made
some promises. Today, when we are at this juncture of elections and facing the electorate, I can asse?? with
immense pride and satisfaction that the journey of resolves and commitments that began in 2014 will
continue to be carried forward in accordance with the wishes of the people. We have succeeded in kindling
faith towards development in the minds of people and have convinced them that the Narendra Modi led
BJP government is the harbinger of a New India. The same people who used to once say, “Nothing can
happen in this country”, are now hopeful and say, “We can do more” while standing united for the
development of India.
Bharatiya Janata Pa??y is commi??ed to Indian values, to making Antyodaya (Garib Kalyan) a reality and to
re-establishing the ideals of nation building. Our promises originate from our ??ve commitments (Panch-
Nishtha). We have an ideology that inspires us to ful??l our promises, which are not just limited to elections
and election manifestos. Inclusive development, good governance, national security, promotion of our
cultural heritage at a global level and continuance of a multi-dimensional progress are the salient features
of our ideology that continues to be a pa?? of our promises and commitments to the nation. None of the
vision documents or manifestos of the Bharatiya Janata Pa??y are either temporary or a mere pile of papers.
Every single word wri??en in our manifesto signi??es our commitment to the nation and its people.
Bharatiya Janata Pa??y has been active in public sphere for decades guided by the ideological foundation
laid down by Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee and carried forward by Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya through his
mission of Antyodaya (Garib Kalyan) . Whenever our pa??y has received the mandate of the Indian people to
govern the country, we have served the people and ful??lled their wishes with full sincerity and commitment.
Under Atalji’s leadership, when the BJP-led NDA government won the mandate to govern the country, our
pa??y ensured that the bene??ts of development and good governance reach the last citizen at the bo??om
of the societal ladder. Antyodaya (Garib Kalyan) remains Bharatiya Janata Pa??y’s path, its resolve and goal.
President’s
Note
5
of loans to more than 14 crore people under MUDRA Yojana are some of the historic achievements of our
government. The Congress led UPA government could never have dreamt of achieving, let alone envisaging
such watershed policy initiatives. The idea of ful??lling the basic necessities of every ordinary citizen is
intrinsic to our pa??y’s ideology.
Friends, this election is not merely to elect a government, it is an election to ensure the country’s national
security, it is an election to propel India to become among the top ??ve economic powers, it is an election to
transform the lives of 50 crore poor Indians, it is an election to take the country forward and to make India
great in the comity of nations.
India has been able to convey to the global community the unequivocal message that it considers terrorism
as a serious threat to the world and stands in solidarity for conce??ed action against the menace of
terrorism. We have also been able to convey that India will instantly give a be????ing reply to any act of terror
that is perpetrated against us. The world, today, sees us as a strong and emerging power. Not only have we
succeeded in strengthening our Armed Forces with state-of-the-a?? defence technologies, but also
become self-reliant in this ??eld.
In last ??ve years our government has done incredible work in establishing a transparent system of
governance, fu??hering economic development and increasing people’s pa??icipation in the country’s
progress. Today, India is the sixth largest economy in the world and from the point of view of ease of doing
business we have emerged as one of the best destinations in the world. India’s prestige on the global stage
is at an all-time high since Independence. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, we
have been able to make an India that our friends praise, our competitors respect and our enemies fear. India
is now in a position to adopt an independent stand on national security, to successfully strive to strengthen
our Armed Forces and to lead the world in various spheres. In the ??eld of space too, India has emerged as a
global power.
The General Election of 2019 is an election for carrying forward the multi-dimensional journey of
development sta??ed by the Narendra Modi led government. This election is signi??cant because it narrates
the story of a country that has faced historical wrongs before this government came to power in 2014. It is a
government which has, since then, demonstrated that in the race of development it is not going to stop or
slow down. In the journey of aspirations and trust, it is an election to select a government which has one aim
and objective and that is to continue with the journey of development, good governance and prosperity.
This election is not between two political pa??ies; rather, it is an election to dissipate the negativity that
makes us oblivious of our glorious past and our cultural roots and values. This election is not about victory or
defeat; rather it is an election to reject those oppo??unists who trample upon the hopes of the common
people for their personal gains. This election is to defeat dynasticism, casteism, communalism and
corruption so that India’s democracy can be infused with greater strength.
In order to asce??ain the future of India’s march of development, we have incorporated in our Sankalp the
hopes, aspirations, opinions and suggestions of crores of our fellow citizens. This Vision Document is the
representative document of the expectations of the people of India, it gives voice to their aspirations. To
ensure that the Vision Document of a government that bases itself on people’s pa??icipation and suppo??,
also re??ects their hopes and aspirations, the Manifesto Commi??ee led by Shri Rajnath Singhji had
unde??aken a marathon e??o??. This e??o?? is now before you in the form of the Sankalp Patra. Each member
of the commi??ee and every person associated with the formulation of this document deserves
appreciation.
Come, let us strengthen Shri Narendra Modi’s hands, and resolve to form a full majority BJP government.
With Best Wishes
Amit Shah
National President, BJP
6
When the BJP government was formed in 2014, the country was faced with the challenge of turning around
the wheel of development that had been stalled because of rampant corruption, misrule and indecisiveness
of the UPA government, under whose rule the country had been pushed into the darkness of despair. For a
decade, India had a government with no clarity of intentions, lacking strong leadership which could take
crucial decisions and bere?? of a policy directive devoted to the welfare of the people. In the last ??ve years,
we have been successful in li??ing the country out of the morass of problems inherited from 10 years of
misrule by the UPA government, while also increasing the pace of development.
A??er running a government devoted to the welfare of the common citizen for ??ve years, we can proudly say
that we have not only successfully achieved our goals, but have empowered millions of Indians to become
self-reliant and capable of ful??lling their dreams and aspirations. This government has made historic e??o??s
made towards empowerment of the ordinary Indian, establishment of a strong and transparent system of
governance and inculcating the spirit of unity and ful??lment of the vision of ‘Ek Bharat , Shreshtha Bharat’.
India has moved on the path of progress at an unprecedented pace a??er Prime Minister Shri Narendra
Modi-led NDA government won a decisive mandate to form the government and serve the people of India.
We are bringing to you this document at a time when our country has already embarked on the path of rapid
progress under this government. It is as a result of Shri Modi’s vision of inclusive development and good
governance that we are consistently moving forward and are poised to achieve the goal of building a New
India by 2022.
It gives me immense pride and satisfaction to present to you the Bharatiya Janata Pa??y’s vision document,
which is a collection of the hopes and aspirations of every Indian. This document is a compendium of our
promises and commitments that we make to our fellow citizens who stand with us on the journey of
development which India has unde??aken since 2014. We have prepared this document a??er an elaborate
and extensive discussion with people from di??erent regions, communities and classes across the country
through ‘Bharat Ke Mann Ki Baat’, the largest ever collaborative e??o?? to engage citizens in cra??ing the
roadmap of development for the next ??ve years. These direct suggestions from all across the country form
the core of our vision document for the 2019 elections. The promises that we have made in it are our
commitments to facilitate building a New India.
In the last ??ve years, under the leadership of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, the NDA government has
successfully vindicated the mandate that it won in 2014. With the will to transform the hopes of 100 million
of fellow citizens into a solid 'trust', we have pledged to take the country forward on the path of progress.
Sankalp Patra
Note
7
Chairperson, Manifesto Commi??ee
Rajnath Singh
In order to achieve the highest goals of agricultural development, we have unde??aken the unprecedented
measure of making the agriculture sector 'farmer centric'. As a result of our e??o??s in this sector, we are now
moving rapidly towards the goal of doubling the income of farmers by 2022. By increasing the Minimum
Suppo?? Price of crops by 1.5 times the cost, we have ensured a fair value for their yield. Through the Prime
Minister Kisan Samman Nidhi, the government has provided ??nancial suppo?? to farmers by giving them an
assistance of Rs. 6,000 per year, transferred directly into their bank accounts. The BJP government has also
ensured that adequate warehousing and marketing oppo??unities are available to farmers, thereby
reducing the chances of risk to a minimum.
In the last ??ve years, the work done by our government for the development and empowerment of every
section of society including women, youth and weaker sections has instilled faith in every citizen that they
can move ahead on the path of progress with dignity. Prior to 2014, numerous projects lay idle for years
because the UPA government had failed to work on them. This, in turn, resulted in the decrease of both the
number and quality of basic amenities for the citizens of our country. By simplifying processes, we have
achieved a historic success in bringing the economy back on track. 'One Nation, One Tax' has become a
milestone in the direction of indirect tax reform. Because of proactive and e??ective measures taken to
ensure the external and internal security of the country, the Prime Minister Modi-led government has given
rise to a sense of security in the minds of the people. By accomplishing all these tasks, we have presented
the example of an accountable, sensitive and strong-willed government.
The BJP government has always considered people’s pa??icipation of utmost impo??ance in good
governance and therefore ensured that people in general were given ample oppo??unities for pa??icipating
in our initiatives and voicing their opinions. With this spirit, we have made an a??empt to know 'Bharat Ke Man
Ki Baat' and taken this into account while de??ning our work for the next ??ve years and in the formation of our
vision document.
We connected crores of people under the 'Bharat Ke Man Ki Baat' dialogue which was a nationwide
campaign run by the BJP for a month. Millions of suggestions were shared with us through di??erent means.
Our manifesto is a document of expression of crores of suggestions and aspirations. With the aid of about
7,700 suggestion boxes, 300 rath, more than 100 dialogue program, more than 4000 'Bharat Ke Man Ki
Baat' program and through the social media we have made an e??o?? to gauge the ‘Mann ki Baat’ of people
across India. At the same time, we consulted many domain expe??s, whose suggestions constitute the basis
of this vision document.
This vision document is the vision of an uninterrupted journey upon which we had embarked with the
blessings of the people in 2014. By presenting our achievements in the last ??ve years as a proof of our
dedication, we are ??rmly commi??ed to continue that journey in the coming ??ve years. This vision document
is our plan of action for achieving these objectives and to ful??l the aspirations of every Indian.
Since this document is inspired by the ‘will of the people’, we dedicate it to the people by reiterating our
unwavering commitment and dedication to the creation of a New India.
8
As a continuing government, we will build on the foundations laid out in the last ??ve years in terms of reestablishing
macro-economic stability, building long-term frameworks of governance, raising India's
international stature, introducing a non-nonsense approach to internal/external security, upgrading the
stock of physical/social infrastructure and, most impo??antly, building a basic safety net for the deprived
section of our society. We have demonstrated what all can be achieved by a commi??ed and decisive
leadership that is not afraid to take hard decisions.
In the next ??ve years, we promise to create growth oppo??unities for all citizens in every aspect of life. Sab ka
Saath, Sab ka Vikas remains our guiding principle. We intend to reach out to a developed future while
retaining our civilisational roots.
In order to achieve our long-term goals, we must ??rst secure our country against internal and external
aggression. These threats need to be dealt with at their roots and our decisive leadership that will equip our
security apparatus with all the necessary tools. As we have already demonstrated, we intend to use our
foreign policy, were necessary, in order to tackle the problem of global terrorism. Thus, we intend to
increase the strength of our diplomatic and allied cadres. We will also build on the “Make in India in Defence”
initiative to fu??her indigenise our defense equipment.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi had promised, in his very ??rst speech in Lok Sabha, that this government
would work for the welfare of the poorest. In the last ??ve years, we have created a transparent mechanism
for directly delivering basic services to the bo??om of the pyramid by leveraging Aadhaar, DBT and Jan Dhan
accounts. Basic health has been a special focus with large investments made on sanitation (Swachh
Bharat), health insurance (Ayushmaan Bharat) and in modern medical facilities. We intend to accelerate the
pace of providing access to basic amenities such as housing, electricity, toilet, cooking gas, and
health/social security to every poor Indian household, rural and urban, in the next ??ve years and to bring the
percentage of population below the pove??y line to single digits.
The physical infrastructure of the country has undergone an unprecedented upgrade in the last ??ve years.
We have connected 91% of villages with rural roads, electri??ed 100% of villages, operationalized 36 new
airpo??s and introduced metro networks in several cities. Looking ahead, we plan to build 60,000 km of
National Highways, connect 100% of villages with rural roads, operationalize 100 new airpo??s, modernize
400 railway stations, and cover 50 cities with metro networks.
In the last ??ve years, we re-imposed macro-economic stability while building lasting frameworks for
economic governance. These frameworks include the Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code, in??ation-targeting,
nationwide Goods & Services Tax, and the banking sector clean-up. These e??o??s have not only changed
the business culture of the country and anchored in??ation at 4 percent, but have also been internationally
recognized with a sovereign rating upgrade and a sharp rise in our Ease of Doing Business ranking. We will
ensure that India remains the world's fastest growing major economy in future while maintaining macrostability.
We aspire to be the world's third largest economy by 2030.
Since our economic model is based on entrepreneurship and innovation, we commit to simplifying and
lowing tax rates. An impo??ant aspect of the ease of doing business is the ability to enforce contracts and
resolve disputes. Therefore, we promise to signi??cantly increase the capacity of the legal system within ??ve
years in pa??nership/co-ordination with the judiciary.
TOWARDS A NEW INDIA
9
For three generations, India's socio-economic system was held hostage to dynastic perpetuation. This
propagated a corrupt, self-servicing system of political patronage that came to pervade every aspect of
life in India. In 2014, the country voted decisively to end this system. Under the leadership of PM Modi, every
e??o?? has been made to re-establish probity in public life, introduce transparency in policy-making and in
the management of national assets as well as to bring o??enders to book.
In the last ??ve years, we have created a national common market for the industry and services sectors. By
lowering in??ation and cleaning up the banking system, we are now in a position to structurally lower the real
cost of capital. This is key to a sustained increase in private sector investment. We intend to establish a
National Traders' Welfare Board as well as announce a National Policy for Retail Trade. The tourism sector will
be a special focus. We will make sure that all UNESCO World Heritage Sites in India have facilities of
international standard. We will also identify and promote speci??c sites of cultural/natural impo??ance as a
national priority (while being sensitive to their preservation).
Every society progresses through the empowerment of women, inclusion of minorities and the
encouragement of youth. We will not allow these objectives to be held back by the politics of appeasement.
Therefore, we hope to modernize personal laws to prohibit practices such as Talaq-e-Biddat and Nikah
Halala. We intend to invest in our human potential by focusing on the quality of our primary/secondary
schools as well as expanding our te??iary education capacity. In addition, we will also invest in a select set of
universities and research institutions in order make them world class.
The cultural, ecological and social capital of a country are just as impo??ant as its economic capital. These
too need continuous investment and we intend to expand suppo?? for protecting cultural/linguistic
heritage, conserving sites of ecological/historical impo??ance, and promoting our civilizational ideas both
internationally and to the next generation. We reiterate our stand to explore all possibilities within the
framework of the Constitution to facilitate the construction of a Ram Temple in Ayodhya.
Agriculture employs a large propo??ion of our labour force. In order to ensure remunerative prices for
farmers, the minimum suppo?? price for 22 crops was increased to 1.5 times cost of production. In addition,
we have curbed the large-scale diversion of subsidized farm inputs through measures like Neem-coating
of urea, rolled out electronic National Agriculture Market (e-NAM), provided insurance cover to 14 crore
farmers under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana and, most recently, introduced direct income suppo??
for 12 crore farming families through the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi. In the next ??ve years, we will
create a National Warehousing Grid, invest Rs25 lakh crores in farm/rural productivity, introduce interestfree
Kisan Credit Cards and extend the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi to all farmers. We remain
commi??ed to the promise of doubling farmer incomes by 2022 and more resources will be made available if
necessary.
The above summary is based on the vision of Prime Minister Modi to build a technologically modern,
entrepreneurial, rules-based economy that is secure from external/internal security threats and
simultaneously able to build on its cultural, ecological and social assets.
We remain commi??ed to ensuring the bene??ts of constitutional provisions to the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and backward classes. We recently introduced a fu??her 10% reservation for the
economically backward sections of the non-reserved category. At the same time, we will expeditiously
complete the National Registration of Citizens in Assam and actively consider its extension to other states.
10
Nation First
The decisive leadership of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has fundamentally altered the national
security paradigm of India in the last ??ve years. Looking ahead, we propose to do the following:
Our security doctrine will be guided by our national security interest only. This is exempli??ed by the
Surgical Strikes and the Air Strikes carried out recently. We will ??rmly continue our policy of ‘Zero
Tolerance’ against terrorism and extremism and will continue to follow our policy of giving a free hand
to our security forces in combating terrorism.
Zero-Tolerance Approach to Terrorism
01
Strengthening our Armed Forces - We will speed up the purchases of outstanding defense related
equipments and weapons. In order to equip the Armed Forces with modern equipment, we will
continue to take focused steps to strengthen the strike capability of the Armed Forces.
Self-reliance in defence sector - In order to ensure self-reliance in procurement of defence
equipment, we have taken several e??ective steps in the last ??ve years. For instance, the most modern
AK-203 automatic ri??es are being manufactured at Amethi under our 'Make in India in Defence'
initiative. We are commi??ed to focus on 'Make in India in Defence' to enable indigenous production of
defence equipment. This will also generate employment and encourage investment in the defence
sector.
National Security
02
03
We have already demonstrated our commitment to the welfare of our veterans with the
implementation of long delayed OROP. To take this commitment forward, we promise to create a more
e??ective framework for the rese??lement of our Armed Forces veterans. Under this e??o??, the Armed
Forces will sta?? planning for the rese??lement of soldiers three years before their retirement and in
accordance with their preferences. This will include provision for skills training, so?? skills training,
??nancial suppo?? for higher education, for housing and for sta??ing an enterprise.
Welfare of Soldiers
04
We will provide assistance to the states to upgrade their police forces through the ‘Scheme for
Modernization of Police Forces’. We will encourage expedited police reforms in the states so as to
enable the State police forces to deal with new types of crimes like cyber crime and help them to be
more sensitive to the citizens, especially the weak and vulnerable sections of the society.
We will continue to take forward the process of modernizing the Central Armed Police Forces to
fu??her increase their capacity and readiness and enable them to e??ectively combat internal security
challenges.
Modernization of Police Forces
05
06
There has been a huge change in the cultural and linguistic identity of some areas due to illegal
immigration, resulting in an adverse impact on local people's livelihood and employment. We will
expeditiously complete the National Register of Citizens process in these areas on priority. In future we
will implement the NRC in a phased manner in other pa??s of the country.
We will continue to unde??ake e??ective steps to prevent illegal immigration in the No??heastern states.
For this, we will fu??her strengthen our border security. A pilot project on the use of technology to
strengthen border security (Sma?? Fencing) was implemented in Dhubri (Assam). We will implement
this on all borders.

Reinforcing Border Security
09
10
A??er e??ectively strengthening coastal security through implementation of a coastal security scheme
to provide modern equipment and allocating funds to the states for establishing coastal police
stations, establishment of National Commi??ee for Strengthening Maritime & Coastal Security, Island
Information System and National Academy of Coastal Policing, we will continue to take steps for
ensuring security of India’s long coastline.
Coastal Safety
11
We are commi??ed to the enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Bill for the protection of
individuals of religious minority communities from neighbouring countries escaping persecution. We
will make all e??o??s to clarify the issues to the sections of population from the No??heastern states who
have expressed apprehensions regarding the legislation. We reiterate our commitment to protect the
linguistic, cultural and social identity of the people of No??heast. Hindus, Jains, Buddhists, Sikhs and
Christians escaping persecution from India’s neighbouring countries will be given citizenship in India.
Citizenship Amendment Bill
12
We have already taken strong actions to reduce le?? wing extremism to a very large extent and limited
them to small pockets. We are commi??ed to taking necessary and e??ective steps against le?? wing
extremism to eliminate this menace in the next ??ve years. In the last ??ve years, we have focussed on
the development of economic and social infrastructure such as roads, mobile towers, schools and
medical facilities in the tribal areas a??ected by le?? wing extremism and we will continue to make
e??o??s in this direction.
Combating Le?? Wing Extremism
13
Ÿ In the last ??ve years, we have made all necessary e??o??s to ensure peace in Jammu and Kashmir
through decisive actions and a ??rm policy. We are commi??ed to overcome all obstacles that come
in the way of development and provide adequate ??nancial resources to all the regions of the state.
We reiterate our position since the time of the Jan Sangh to the abrogation of A??icle 370.
Ÿ We are commi??ed to annulling A??icle 35A of the Constitution of India as the provision is
discriminatory against non-permanent residents and women of Jammu and Kashmir. We believe
that A??icle 35A is an obstacle in the development of the state. We will take all steps to ensure a safe
and peaceful environment for all residents of the state. We will make all e??o??s to ensure the safe
return of Kashmiri Pandits and we will provide ??nancial assistance for the rese??lement of refugees
from West Pakistan, Pakistan occupied Jammu and Kashmir (POJK) and Chhamb.
Jammu & Kashmir- A??icle 370
14
India suppo??s peace,
but the country will not hesitate to take
any steps required for national security
- Shri Narendra Modi
12
Doubling Farmers’ Income
At the very beginning of our current term, Prime Minister Modi embarked on a mission to double
farmers’ income. We will make all e??o??s to achieve this goal by 2022.
Interest-free Kisan Credit Card loans - We will provide sho??-term new agriculture loans up to Rs. 1
lakh at a 0% interest rate for 1-5 years on the condition of prompt repayment of the principal amount.
Pension for small and marginal farmers - We will launch a pension scheme for all small and marginal
farmers in the country so as to ensure social security to them on reaching 60 years of age.
Voluntary enrollment in Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana - Our scheme, Pradhan Mantri Fasal
Bima Yojana has ensured risk mitigation and provided insurance cover for all farmers. We will make
enrolment of farmers under the scheme voluntary.
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana to all - We have launched Pradhan Mantri Kisan
Samman Nidhi Yojana to ensure ??nancial suppo?? to farmers owning land up to 2 hectares. We will
fu??her expand the coverage of the scheme to all the farmers in the country.
Assurance of Quality Seeds - We will ensure timely availability of improved seeds of promising
varieties at a??ordable rates with doorstep testing facilities.
?25 lakh crore investment in Agri-rural sector - We are commi??ed to making an investment of Rs.
25 lakh crore to improve the productivity of the farm sector.
Empowering Farmers through Policies - We will work towards reducing all agricultural impo??s and
institute a predictable expo?? and impo?? policy with a built-in mechanism for encouraging expo??s
and discouraging impo??s.
Welfare of Farmers
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
Warehouse Network across the Country - We will build an e??cient storage and transpo??
mechanism for agriculture produce
Ÿ To enable the farmer to store the agri-produce near his village and sell at a remunerative price at an
appropriate time, we will roll out a new Village Storage Scheme of agri-produce. We will provide
farmers with loans at cheaper rates on the basis of storage receipt of the agri-produce.
Oilseeds Mission - We will launch a new mission to achieve self-su??ciency in oil seeds and other agriproducts.
Ÿ Our Pradhan Mantri Krishi SAMPADA Yojana highlights our focus on warehousing as a means of
increasing farmers’ income. To fu??her expand the warehousing infrastructure in the country, we
will establish a National Warehousing Grid along National Highways to ensure necessary logistical
linkages for warehousing of agricultural produce.
Development of Argi-allied sectors
09
Oilseeds Mission - We will launch a new mission to achieve self-su??ciency in oil seeds and other agriproducts.
Ÿ Our Pradhan Mantri Krishi SAMPADA Yojana highlights our focus on warehousing as a means of
increasing farmers’ income. To fu??her expand the warehousing infrastructure in the country, we
will establish a National Warehousing Grid along National Highways to ensure necessary logistical
linkages for warehousing of agricultural produce.
Development of Argi-allied sectors
09
10 To ensure greater promotion and increase pro
